---
layout: post
title: "Essential Apps"
date: 2024-08-31 10:00:40
draft: false
blurb: "The apps I use as a MacOS user"
og_image: images/apps.png
---

These are a collection of apps that I use (or have used). They are all free to download, and despite having paid tiers, I always use the free version.

#### Table of Contents

- [Adobe Reader](#####adobe-reader)
- [AlDente](#aldente)
- [Amphetamine](#amphetamine)
- [AppCleaner](#appcleaner)
- [Arc browser / Zen browser](#arc-browser--zen-browser)
- [Discord](#discord)
- [Espanso](#espanso)
- [Firefox](#firefox)
- [Folx](#folx)
- [Google Drive](#google-drive)
- [Hidden Bar](#hidden-bar)
- [Homebrew](#homebrew)
- [Inkscape](#inkscape)
- [Itsycal](#itsycal)
- [Latest](#latest)
- [LocalSend](#localsend)
- [Maccy](#maccy)
- [Matlab](#matlab)
- [MiddleClick](#middleclick)
- [Monitor Control](#monitor-control)
- [MRtrix](#mrtrix)
- [Office](#office)
- [Paint X](#paint-x)
- [Prism 9](#prism-9)
- [Raycast](#raycast)
- [Rectangle](#rectangle)
- [Spark](#spark)
- [Spotify](#spotify)
- [Stats](#stats)
- [Sublime Text](#sublime-text)
- [The Unarchiver](#the-unarchiver)
- [Tailscale](#tailscale)
- [TickTick](#ticktick)
- [Tunnelblick](#tunnelblick)
- [VLC](#vlc)
- [VSCode](#vscode)
- [XQuartz 2.7.8](#xquartz-278)
- [Zotero](#zotero)
- [Zoom/Teams](#zoomteams)

##### Adobe Reader

The classic PDF reader for viewing and annotating, documents. I prefer it over the default preview app of MacOS only when I need to annotate/comment PDFs, otherwise the preview app is faster and more than enough.

##### AlDente

Battery management tool for MacBooks. Lets you set charging limits to prolong battery lifespan.

##### Amphetamine

Prevents your Mac from sleeping. Great when you are running something on your Mac and need to go away without worrying it will stop running.

##### AppCleaner

Uninstalls apps completely, removing the app but also files and folders it created.

##### Arc browser / Zen browser

I actually don't use Arc browser anymore because it ended support for my older Mac and since then I got used to Firefox (both using it at work and at home). Nevertheless, Zen browser seems promising as it is basically Arc but with the Mozilla engine as the backend. The last time I tried it was a long time ago and was a little bit buggy, now it should be better. Yet, Arc (at least as I left it), was very good but nowadays with The Browser Company shifting its focus away from it, I dont know if I can still reccommend it. I'll need to give it a try again.

##### Discord

Great for chat, video and voice communications for friend groups and teams. I use it at work instead of slack because it has a log of all conversations and is capable of video calls, all in its free tier.

##### Espanso

Open-source cross-platform text expander for automating repetitive typing. Basically whenever you write a keyword it replaces with a phrase you define. So for instance, I've mapped ":address" to my full address and ":email" to my email, as such I never have to write them in full and I never have mistakes writing them. Just make sure that the keyword is not something you could type normally.

##### Firefox

My main browser for work and home. I use it in compact mode and some extensions I use are Bitwarden (password manager), Keepa (shows amazon items prices over time), I don't care about cookies (makes the cookies pop-up disappear), and Video Speed Controller (keybindings to speed up or slow down every video you watch).

##### Folx

The torrent client I use. Its clean and simple UI are great.

##### Google Drive / OneDrive

Services to sync local folder with cloud folders. Cannot have too much redundancy.

##### Hidden Bar

Open-source menu bar organizer that hides icons. Keeps my Mac’s menu bar tidy and distraction-free.

##### Homebrew

Terminal app. Can be useful to download some apps that are no available in the app store.

##### Inkscape

Open-source vector graphics editor. Basically free Adobe Illustrator. I use it to create and edit svg files in my work.

##### Itsycal

Open-source minimal calendar for the menu bar. Lets me quickly check my schedule by clicking its menu bar item. I have it set up to show the current date on the menu bar instead of the default mac utility, which just shows time in my case (with seconds).

##### Latest

Open-source app that tracks updated for all my other apps, as I have them to not update automatically.

##### LocalSend

Open-source AirDrop alternative. As I have an Android phone, I use this to basically do airdrop between my computer and my phone. Like AirDrop, its sends files through the network.

##### Maccy

Open-source clipboard manager that stores all that I command+C. It then allows me to search it and to even have shortcuts for commonly used phrases

##### Matlab

Numerical computing platform. I used to use it in my work but not anymore as I transitioned to python (and VSCode).

##### MiddleClick

Open-source app that enables middle-click functionality on Mac trackpads. Makes tab management and navigation more efficient and easy.

##### Monitor Control

Open-source app that lets you adjust external monitor brightness from your Mac using the keys you would normally use.

##### MRtrix

MRI analysis toolbox through the terminal. I used it in my research for processing and visualizing brain imaging data. I don't use it as much anymore but sometimes I still use it for visualization purposes.

##### Microsoft Office

Needs no introduction.

##### Paint X

Paint for Mac. Sometimes useful to sketch something.

##### Prism 9

Statistical analysis and graphing app. I use it when I need to create publication-ready plots.

##### Raycast

Spotlight on steroids. Speeds up my Mac use by letting me launch apps, do unit convertions, calculations, and finder actions (like ejecting all disksor emptying the trash) all from the keyboard.

##### Rectangle

Open-source window management tool. I used it in the past to do quick snapping and arranging of windows but with the latest MacOS that functionality is built-in so I don't use it anymore. Just had to change the settings so that the mosaic windows have no margins (How can the default be with margins!).

##### Spark

Email client that I use for all my emails with one inbox for all #inboxzero.

##### Spotify

Needs to introduction.

##### Stats

Open-source system monitor for the menu bar. Lets me keep an eye on all computer stats. I use it to keep track of CPU, and temperature. Additionally, I control the fan speed when needed.

##### Sublime Text

Lightweight text editor. My choice for quick code edits, and note-taking.

##### The Unarchiver

File extraction tool that supports many formats.

##### Tailscale

Easy-to-use VPN for secure remote access to devices and networks. I useit to access my home network.

##### TickTick

Task manager and to-do list app. I use it more for personal stuff. I've tried other task managers like google keep (I just use it for lists basically as it is very simple), microsoft to-do, apple reminders, and todoist, but I think TickTick is still the best. It's features and cross-platform compatibility make it by far the best (and they keep adding new features).

##### Tunnelblick

Open-source OpenVPN client for macOS. I used it for connecting securely to my work network.

##### VLC

Open-source app that I use to watch videos.

##### VSCode

Visual Studio Code is my main code editor. Highly customizable and supports many programming languages and extensions. I use it with the Dark Modern theme and with the VSCode Great Icons theme package. My most important etensions are: Remote repositories, Python, isort, Jupyter, Rainbow CSV, SVG previewLatex Workshop, NiiVue, Flake8, Data Wrangler and Github Copilot.

##### XQuartz 2.7.8

Open-source X11 windowing system for macOS. I use it for remotely running GUIs of certain work applications.

##### Zotero

My reference manager of choice. I've tried Mendeley and it was too simple, besides sometimes it just didn't work.

##### Zoom/Teams

Video conferencing apps.
